(uplifting music)
(typing)
All right.
So, Let's say you have a situation
where you're absolutely sure a variable won't be null.
But, the compiler wants you to use the safe-call operator.
But, you know, for sure, 100 percent, that the
variable won't contain null.
And, of course, you're not wrong, because when you
believe a variable can't be null,
it must be true.
Now, I chuckle when I say this,
because, of course, we can be wrong.
In a simple application, perhaps not.
But in a real world app, when we're calling code
we haven't written,
things can get iffy.
More importantly, documentation can be outdated,
or just plain wrong.
I had a situation not too long ago, when I updated
a WordPress plugin on one of my websites,
and as soon as I did, images stopped showing up on
pages generated by the plugin.
So, I contacted support, because this was a plugin
that I paid for.
And, the developer got back to me, and he said
"I know what the problem is.
"A third-party library function is returning null,
"when it shouldn't be."
'Cause the documentation says it shouldn't
be returning null.
So, of course, he was relying on the documentation, and
he wasn't checking for null.
And the code was failing.
But, let's say you're absolutely sure that a
variable won't be null.
Well, Kotlin provides a way for you to tell the compiler
that you're sure.
That you're absolutely positive the variable
can't contain null.
And this is called the not-null assertion.
So, if you're sure an expression can't evaluate to null,
and you want to tell the compiler, 'cause you
want to stop using the question mark,
the safe call operator,
you can follow the expression with two explanation marks.
So, let's try this out.
Let's go back up to our string here,
and, we're going to change this to,
this isn't null.
And then we'll say val,
let's say str4 this time
equals str.2 uppercase.
Okay, so in the above code, we're positive that
str isn't null.
I mean this is a silly example, but we're positive,
because we've just assigned it.
So we know that it's okay to go ahead and use str and
you're not going to get an all pointer exception.
But, because we've declared str as nullable,
maybe later on down the line, we're thinking,
well it could be null.
We just know it isn't right now.
The compiler wants us to use the safe call operator here.
Because it knows that, hey wait a minute,
str might be null.
So you might get an null pointer exception here.
And, so, we'll update the code, as follows:
Instead of putting a question mark after str,
we'll put two exclamation marks.
And, then, you'll see that the error goes away.
So, what we've done here, is followed str with the
non-null assertion.
Now, it would be safer, of course, to use the safe operator.
So, why would you want to do this?
You might want an exception to be thrown
when str is null.
So, when you use the question mark, the safe call
operator, you'll never get an null pointer exception.
But, maybe you want to see a null pointer exception
for some reason.
Maybe, if something is null,
the rest of your code is not going to be able
to operate properly.
So, forget about not wanting a null pointer exception.
If str is null, something has seriously gone wrong
with the application.
You want it to throw a null pointer exception,
because you want to be alerted to this.
So, that's one reason you might want to
use this two exclamation marks here.
So, the non null assertion is shorthand for
the following code:
We always kind of, we've been doing this,
doing the longhand, so I'll show you what this
is shorthand for, so basically,
if str equals null, then in this case,
you're going to throw an exception.
Otherwise, in this case we go ahead and use it.
So, 2uppercase.
So here, if str is null, an exception
is going to get thrown,
and if it isn't, it will go ahead,
and call 2uppercase.
So, let's delete this, and then let's
go ahead and cause an exception to be thrown,
so we can see what happens,
after all, we've never seen
a null pointer exception in Kotlin before,
so let's go ahead and do it.
Alright, so we've got it an exception here,
but you'll notice, that it's not,
java.lang.nullpointerexception,
it's a kotlin.kotlinnullpointer exception.
So, that's just something to keep in mind,
if you wanna catch the exception
that resolves, if for some reason
you're going to be using the
non-null assertion, or not-null assertion,
rather and you wanna catch the exception
that can be thrown.
Now, just one more point before we leave
null assertions, let's slightly change
our code to the following,
I'm actually going to delete the code here.
Okay so we have valstr,
declare it as a nullable string,
and then we're going to declare str2,
and we're going to assign it str,
and we're going to assert that this can't be null,
even though we know it is,
so we're doing something deliberately stupid here.
Then we're going say valstr3 equals str2.2upercase.
Okay, so now and put up your hand
if you think we're going to a null pointer exception,
hopefully, everybody's hand is up here,
and we do but the reason I did
something so deliberately stupid here
was to show you, the line number.
You'll notice that the exception
is thrown at line six, it's thrown up here.
It's not thrown, when we call the 2uppercase,
it's actually thrown up here, on line six.
So, it occurs where we made the assertion,
not when we actually try to use the null value.
This is an important distinction.
So, when we make the assertion,
the run time checks whether the assertion is true.
If it isn't, it throws the exception.
Now, the exception, as you can see,
reports the line number,
but it doesn't contain any information,
about the expression that evaluated to null,
and because of that, it's not a good idea
to string non-null assertions together,
like you do with the save operator.
So you don't want to do something like this,
remember we had something like this,
with the safe operator,
well now we use the not null assertion operator,
and we'll say like bankbranch,
and we're going to say, oh that's not null,
.address, you know and oh,
and that's not null and then country,
oh and you know that's not null either.
You don't want to do any thing like this,
because if an exception is thrown,
you're not going to know which
one of these actually is null,
there's not going to be any information
in here that tells you that,
you're just going to get a single line number.
So it'll just say that I got a null pointer exception
on line nine, but it's not going to tell you it
was country that was null, or bankbranch, that was null.
So, it's not a good idea to string not null assertions
together like this, like you do with the save operator.
Alright, let me get rid of that,
so let's write another function,
we're going to cover another function soon.
Don't worry about the sintext for now,
so we'll say function printtext,
string text and we'll just printline the text,
Obviously, in here I'm writing Java code,
string, and then we'll print the text.
Now, obviously this is a really, really, really
stupid function, we wouldn't write
something like this, but it'll serve our purposes.
So, let's call this function,
and let's pass str as a parameter,
and we'll set str to a non-null value, before we do this.
So, we'll change this to this isn't null.
And then we'll say printtext, str.
And guess what?
We can't do that.
Can anybody guess why we can't do it?
Well, because we have a nullable string here
and our function expects a non-nullable string.
So, this graphically displays the nullable
and non nullable types are actually are...
They actually are a distinct types.
So, we have a problem because,
what if we have a nullable variable,
but we wanna call a function that's
expecting a non nullable type?
I mean, you can see that this could be a common
situation, especially if you're using
third party libraries and things like that,
that you haven't written,
there might be a function that's expecting
a non nullable type, but you have a nullable variable,
and you can't change that, the nature of your code,
as such that you can't change that.
So what do you do?
Well your first thought, might be to do the following,
if your sure this isn't null at this point,
you might just go like that,
I'll assert that it's not null.
And you'll see that works,
the error goes away,
but what happens if str is null?
The function you're calling won't be checking
for null, or using the safe operator,
because it has said that text has to be,
non-null, so there's no reason in this
function body, for it to be worrying about nulls,
because it's insisting on a non null value.
And you're the one that's up here is sort of
overriding that.
So, if str was null,
you'll get an exception thrown at this statement.
So, it would be better to not
call this function when str is null.
So, rather than saying,
I'm absolutely sure str isn't null,
I mean again, silly example, but let's pretend,
there's tonnes of code up here,
by the time you get here,
it could be null, slim chance,
but it could be null.
Instead of doing that, which is kinda
like a brute force approach,
and you're not calling this function
in the spirit that it's intended to be called,
instead, you can use what's called the let function.
Now, let doesn't exist specifically for this scenario,
but it's the perfect solution for this scenario.
So, what is the let function?
Well, it's more shorthand.
Kotlin loves shorthand, for stuff.
Okay, so let's first type out
what we're trying to accomplish the long way.
We basically want to do this,
if str is not equal to null,
I might code braces here,
then go ahead and call it, go ahead and call this function.
That's what we're trying to accomplish, longhand.
Now instead, we went ahead and with a brute force method,
said, "Oh no. This can't be null. Don't even test."
So instead of this longhand way of doing it,
let's now use the let function.
So, we're going to say, str and we're going to use
the safe operator here, but we're going to follow
it by let, and then we're going to say, printtext it.
So what we're saying here is, if str isn't null,
that's the save operator, then let this function
call go ahead. And you refer to to the variable,
with the save operator, inside the
block here the expression that follows the let,
you refer to it as using the key word it,
So if str is null, this won't happen.
But, if str isn't null,
then the expression can go ahead.
So, you're kinda saying let this happen
as long as str isn't null.
Now, what let actually wants here is a lambda expression.
This is a lambda, you can't tell from looking
at it here, but this is a lambda.
And inside the lambda expression you,
as I said refer to the variable
you're testing using it.
So essentially, the let function uses the object
that calls it, as the parameter to the lambda.
And that's exactly what's happening here.
str is the object that's calling it,
and so it substituted here for it.
Now you don't have to call let,
with the safety operator, here we're doing it,
because we're essentially using let
because this might be null.
So, we're using the safe operator,
because we don't want a null pointer exception,
but as I said, but there are other cases,
where you'll want to use let that don't involve
this particular scenario, where you're using it
because you wanna against null pointer exceptions,
or in our case, you wanna call a function,
that wants a non nullable type,
and as you can see, we don't get an error.
So, this takes care of the situation,
where you have a nullable type,
you wanna call a function that wants a non-nullable type.
All you have to do is, call let with the
safe operator and call the function
as a lambda expression.
So, another point, let's take a look at
the following code now, I'll say val and this time,
I'll say str4 and we'll make this a nullable string,
and we'll say that this equals to null.
We'll declare another string,
and we'll say, this isn't nullable,
which it isn't because, we haven't declared
it as a nullable string.
Now we wanna, say printline str4 equals another str.
Now we've learned that in Kotlin,
the equals operator, checks for structural equality,
meaning that it checks the value of the objects,
it defers to .equals function.
But in this case, str4 can be null,
but we're not getting an error.
The Kotlin compiler is isn't saying,
you're about to do something that can result
in an null pointer exception.
So, why is that?
It's because the equals operator,
is a safe operator.
You know, we wouldn't wanna have to do something
like this, that's gonna look messy,
it's gonna look weird,
and Kotlin, once again strives to be concise.
So, because of this special case,
where you have an operator that's actually calling
a function under the covers, implicitly,
this function is safe, so the null check is done for
you under the covers, and we'll see
that if we run, we're not going to get any errors.
And you also see that our function
was called fine up here, and printed,
this isn't null.